you've come to the western pacific east
of the philippines
you won't miss the mariana trench
because it has a huge
shape the size of a crescent this gutter
that looks like a scar
on the earth's crust stretches 1500
miles long
the mariana trench was formed by the
junction of two tectonic plates
there are many such junctions all over
the planet
but you chose this one because it's the
deepest
the bottom of the mariana trench is
almost 7 miles
deep you remember how you climbed mount
everest
the highest point on earth its top is
located at an altitude of 29
000 feet you were shocked by the height
but now you're looking into the mariana
trench
and feel very terrified to get to the
bottom
you'd have to dive a distance of one and
a half times the height of everest
almost any object would simply be
destroyed at this depth by the enormous
pressure
and this is why you're gonna throw the
diamond in there
diamond is one of the hardest substances
on the planet
you tried to burn it hit it drill but
none of those things broke it it also
can't be destroyed by time
most of the diamonds appeared on earth
before the first plants did
despite their age they still retain
their sparkle and shape
diamond is pure carbon formed under
extremely high pressure in temperature
for billions of years carbon lies at a
depth of 50 to 500 miles
pressed down by millions of tons of
earth and warm by high temperatures that
can reach up to 2000 degrees fahrenheit
very slowly the carbon turns into a
diamond
these gems are found deep underground at
the junction of shifting tectonic plates
when volcanoes erupt or in meteorites
when carbon is heated to other high
temperatures
one day you were very lucky you found a
little diamond after an earthquake
this was one case in a million like
winning the lottery
humanity is not yet able to reach the
places where diamonds are formed
only nature can push them closer to the
surface
after your unsuccessful attempts to
destroy your diamond
you went to jewelers for help no they
don't usually destroy diamonds
but they do cut them turning them into
precious gems
you watched how the jeweler chose the
right angle trajectory
and force of impact then hit and broke
off a piece of the diamond
they do this to give the diamonds a
multi-faceted beautiful
geometrically perfect shape but also
sometimes
they can hit incorrectly and shatter the
diamond into many little pieces
therefore jewelers will study a diamond
for several days
or even months before starting to cut it
yeah
if the diamond cutter ever says oops
it's not good news
luckily when the jeweler was done your
diamond got a perfect polyhedral
shape the light falling on it refracted
and gave it its bright glow
which is why diamonds are so popular
under certain conditions of light
a diamond can disappear in a glass of
water because of its crystal clarity
your diamond was the size of three match
heads its weight was one carat or 200
milligrams
a little more than the weight of one
match and the cost of such a small
weight
is several tens of thousands of dollars
depending on the diamond's quality
you sold your diamond for twelve
thousand dollars but now you're holding
in your hands
the biggest in the world it's three
thousand one hundred and six
carats this is almost a pound and a half
the weight of a light fitness dumbbell
it's called the
culinary and it was discovered in south
africa in 1905.
in 1908 cullinan was cut into nine large
and
100 smaller pieces the largest piece
weighs
530 carats and is installed in the royal
scepter of the british ruler
displayed in the london tower the
jeweler joseph
asher who cut the cullinan spent six
months preparing for the operation he
studied the diamond almost at a
microscopic level before dividing it
but the first attempt failed the steel
blade broke on the diamond
with the second attempt the diamond was
cut as planned
but for this experiment scientists with
jewelers put
all the pieces together you're nervous
right now
you take a deep breath and throw the
diamond into the water
while the police take you into custody
we're falling with a diamond too
to watch what happens next the diamond
falls toward the bottom of the trench
for a long time
the pressure increases every second at a
depth of 0.6 miles
light stops penetrating the water and we
see our diamond stop
shining there are fewer and fewer fish
as it falls
the temperature drops sharply when it
reaches the bottom of the mariana trench
the temperature will fall to 33 degrees
fahrenheit
in water this temperature feels much
colder than in the air
suddenly light appears it's projected
onto the diamond
and the stone shines again but the light
comes not from the sun
but from an angler fish that uses a
flashlight on its head to lure in prey
the fish can't handle the strongest
stone and swims away
leaving the diamond in pitch darkness
during the dive
the diamond meets many other unusual
creatures
small toxic crayfishes or microorganisms
that feed on a substance similar to oil
and there are transparent fish we can
see their organs and skeletons through
its skin
the diamond reaches ten thousand feet
one third of the way down
at this depth any tree would have been
flattened
glass shattered and some metals press
flat
only special underwater bath escapes can
descend here
these exploring machines are made of
heavy duty steel and designed in perfect
geometric proportions
look the diamond has finally got to the
bottom
here the pressure is eight tons per
square inch
like putting a penny under the weight of
a tyrannosaurus rex
in the mariana trench this weight
presses on all sides
but our diamond won't feel it it was
formed in places where the pressure is
many times greater
like a thousand t-rex is sitting on a
penny plus
it's not alive and can't feel a thing
but as mentioned before
diamonds can break if you press or cut
it in a certain place or angle
there are videos where diamonds are
destroyed under a hydraulic press
at the bottom of the mariana trench the
diamond is subjected to great pressure
every millimeter of every angle is under
tremendous strain
though unlikely the diamond may shatter
and the mariana trench would be covered
with beautiful
diamond dust there's no way to know for
sure though
because in real life no one would throw
a precious stone worth hundreds of
thousands of dollars
into the deepest place on earth just to
see what happens
at least we don't think so it's more
likely that over billions of years
under this high pressure the diamond
would become stronger and denser
until then it'll just lie there forever
or until some oceanographers
find it during an expedition